dlt tutorial (#17)
exasol/tutorials: dlt/doc/dlt_tutorial.md

## 📦 1. Install `dlt` Globally

Install `dlt` so you can use the CLI:

``` bash
pip install dlt
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 🏁 2. Initialize a New Pipeline

Create a new folder for your project.

``` bash
mkdir dlt-tutorial
cd dlt-tutorial
```

Use the `chess` source and `sqlalchemy` destination:

``` bash
dlt init chess sqlalchemy

```

> The built-in `chess` source is a simple example and **does not require
> parameters**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 🧪 3. Create and Activate a Virtual Environment

``` bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## ➕ 4. Install Project Dependencies

Install `dlt` with SQLAlchemy support and the Exasol driver:

``` bash
pip install dlt[sqlalchemy] sqlalchemy-exasol
```

Update your `requirements.txt`:

``` txt
dlt[sqlalchemy]
sqlalchemy-exasol
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 🔌 5. Configure the SQLAlchemy Destination (Exasol)

> Example below is what a typical `secrets.toml` section to configure the SQLAlchemy Destination would look like when using a docker container for testing purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tje xample below is what a typical `secrets.toml` section to configure the SQLAlchemy destination would look like when using a Docker container for testing purposes.
```

```
[destination.sqlalchemy.credentials]
drivername = "exa+websocket"
username    = "sys"
password    = "exasol"
host        = "127.0.0.1"  # will be overridden by EXA_HOST

> port        = 9563         # will be overridden by EXA_PORT

Reviewer: I see from the comment that it would be overwritten, but just curious why `9563` instead of `8563`?

Author: Port mapping, it's just what I usually use. Copy-pasted it in. If you think it's confusing I could alter it.

query       = { SSLCertificate = "SSL_VERIFY_NONE" }
```

### ⚙️ Configuration Priority

1.  **Environment variables**\
2.  **Project `.dlt/secrets.toml`**\
3.  **Project `.dlt/config.toml`**\
4.  **Global `~/.dlt/secrets.toml` and `~/.dlt/config.toml`**\
5.  **Defaults in code**

👉 Environment variables override everything.\

> 👉 Project config overrides global config. Make sure to \

Reviewer: I think the second sentence is incomplete. What had you wanted to put?
```
👉 Project config overrides global config. Make sure to \
```

> 👉 Global config is useful for shared defaults across projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
👉 A global config is useful for shared defaults across projects.
```

See [DLT setup documentation](https://dlthub.com/docs/general-usage/credentials/setup) for more information on how to properly configure pipelines.

> For the purposes of this tutorial we spun up an Exasol docker-db using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the purpose of this tutorial, we spun up an Exasol Docker database using:
```

```
docker run --name exasoldb -p 127.0.0.1:9563:8563 --detach --privileged --stop-timeout 120  exasol/docker-db:2025.2.0
```

> (More info on Exasol docker-db and how to set it up can be found [here](https://hub.docker.com/r/exasol/docker-db/).)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(More info on Exasol's Docker Database and how to set it up can be found on the [exasol/docker-db page](https://hub.docker.com/r/exasol/docker-db/).)
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## ▶️ 6. Run the Pipeline

``` bash
python chess_pipeline.py
```

This will extract data from the chess API and load it into your Exasol
database.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## ⚠️ Current Limitations

> **Warning**
>

> > Binary types such as `UUINT`, `BLOB`, `BINARY` and `VARBINARY` are currently not

Reviewer: Should we add a clause to say why they aren't supported? Like that they aren't native to Exasol or something?
